1 Available-to-Promise Basics
Available-to-promise (ATP) is the uncommitted portion of a company's
inventory and planned production, used to support order promising for
customer orders. The ATP quantity is very different from the available stock
quantity. For example, perhaps there are 100 total pieces of stock for a prod-
uct, but 80 pieces have already been committed to some sales orders or
internal production. In that situation, the ATP quantity is only 20 pieces,
which can be promised to new sales orders or new requirements.
Order promising generally considers other business parameters in addition
to ATP quantity. Suppose a sales order comes from an ordinary customer for
20 pieces when the ATP quantity is 20; thus the sales order gets confirmed.
The ATP quantity then becomes zero; if another sales order is received later
for the same product, then that sales order can't be promised or confirmed.
If this customer (whose order is received later) is a premium customer offer-
ing a high price with good payment terms, then it may be more strategic
(from a business perspective) to prioritize the sales order from the premium
customer over that of the ordinary customer.
s
1 Available-to-Promise Basics
ATP quantity is defined as follo\<VS:
ATP quantity= Stock+ Receipts - Committed requirements
The receipts can be purchase orders or planned orders, and committed
requirements can be sales orders, deliveries, reservations, and the like.
Figure 1.1 sho\ivs the calculation process for ATP quantity and some import-
ant business considerations for prioritizat ion in product availability checks.
Customer order
ATP quantity ' , Stock ATP + Purchase order
+ Planned order -
- - - Sales order (committed} - Delivery - Reservations Yes ' ,
~
No Prioritization
parameters
Price
Payment terms
Priority
Service level
Loyalty
History of return
Order promised Order not promised
Available-to-promise (ATP)
Figure 1.1 ATP Quantity and Business Considerations for Product Availability Checks
If an order can't be promised for the requested quantity on the requested
delivery date for a given product in a particular plant or warehouse, then
other alternatives that may be considered include the following:
• Replenish stock from anoth er plant
If a product's availability is checked in, say, the Munich plant and it isn't
available, then the same product's availability can be checked in, for
example, another plant located in Frankfurt or another nearby location. If
available, then the requisite quantity of the material can be transferred
from the Frankfurt to the Munich plant.
• Substitute the order with anoth er similar produ ct
If a customer wants to buy an iPhone XS 32 GB Black, an alternative product,
such as an iPhone XS 32 GB Gold, can be offered to the customer instead.
6
1 Available-to-Promise Basics
ATP is a response to a customer's request for the availability of product; no
manufacturer (or seller) wants to lose a customer due to nonavailability of
products in today's competitive market. In the following sections, we'll
evaluate the importance of promising to fulfill and committing to a cus-
tomer order with multiple sellers and customers in a typical supply chain
scenario, as well as review the ATP solutions provided by SAP.
1.1 ATP in a Supply Chain
ATP is one of the most critical business functions for all sellers in a supply
chain, as depicted in Figure 1.2. There are financial impacts (apart from loss
of goodwill, credibility, etc.) if a sales order from a customer can't be prom-
ised on the requested delivery date or if there are missing parts during the
assembly of finished goods (roller bearing, pump, etc.) in the production
line, which can result in further delays in the delivery, down the line in sup-
ply chain. However, no manufacturer or seller also wants to keep exces-
sively high inventory levels (requiring higher working capital) to avoid
stockouts.
In addition, note the impact of nonconfirmation of an order (or delay in
delivery) in a supply chain scenario. If there is a delay in delivery of roller
bearings to a pump manufacturer for the supply chain scenario in Figure 1.2,
for example, it may affect the delivery schedule of the pump to the power
plant, resulting in a possible delay in the power plant's installation-com-
missioning schedule.
An organization's ATP situation is highly dynamic (i.e., it changes quickly),
so up-to-date information on ATP is crucial for every manufacturer/seller in
the supply chain. Availability of the right product with the right quality at
the right time at the right place is the aim in every step of the supply chain.
A manufacturer or seller generally has several customers. For example, the
car manufacturer in Figure 1.2 has customers A, B, and C. If the demand is
higher than the production capacity, then the prioritization parameters
7
1 Available-to-Promise Basics
need to be considered to choose a customer and the order quantity that
should be promised to the customer.
In recent years, customers' demand has become unpredictable, and there is
an increasing pressure to keep the stock as low as possible. This unpredict-
able demand and the need for lower stock levels calls for efficient ATP capa-
bilities across all parts of today's complex supply chain .
-
. Customer A
•
,....,
: Customer B
~ Car
....._
: ; Customer C
•
, , Steel - Roller bearing ,.
- Pump I - Power Plant
•
* ATP ~
Figure 1.2 ATP f or Sellers in Supply Chai n
Fan 1
1.2 Available-to-Promise with SAP
ATP check functionality in SAP software is robust and provides extensive
capabilities. SAP solutions with availability checks have also evolved over
time to cater to the increasingly complex requirements in order promising
in today's industry or supply chain.
The concept of classic ATP remains the same in all SAP solutions and can be
executed in transaction objects like sales orders (including delivery), stock
transport orders, production orders, and project networks, using the same
formula for calculation of ATP quantity:
ATP quantity= Stock+ Planned receipts - Planned issues
However, current solutions provide very advanced features for ATP checks
(i.e., beyond classic ATP). The new ATP solution in SAP S/4HANA is called
advanced available-to-promise (aATP), introduced in the 1610 release.
8
1 Available-to-Promise Basics
Currently, SAP has three primary ATP solutions:
• Classic ATP check in SAP ERP and SAP S/4HANA
• Classic ATP check in SAP ERP in combination with global available-to-
promise (GATP), part of SAP Advanced Planning and Optimization (SAP
APO)
• SAP S/4HANA for advanced ATP
In common parlance, ATP and product availability check are often used
interchangeably.
Note
SAP APO has four modules: Demand Planning (DP), Supply Network Planning
(SNP), GATP, and Production Planning and Detailed Scheduling (PP-DS). Table 1.1
describes these modules and their main features.
Demand Planning (DP)
Supply Network Planning (SNP)
• Advanced demand management
and forecasting methods
• E asy aggregation and disaggrega-
tion
• Macro functiona lity for quick and
user-friendly computations
• Cross-plant planning for supply
chain network
• Rough-cut planning to be detailed
through PP/DS
• Advanced planning algorithms
Global ATP (GATP)
Production Planning and Detailed
Scheduling (PP/DS)
• Location and product substitution
• Multilevel ATP (MATP)
• Capability-to-promise (CTP)
• Backorder processing
• Plans material and capacity simul-
taneously
• Finite capacity planning
• Advanced scheduling algorithms
Table 1.1 Functionalities of SAP APO Modules
In the following sections, we'll first discuss the similarities among the three
solutions and then discuss where their functionality differs.
9
1 Available-to-Promise Basics
Similarities in Solutions for Availability Check
Classic ATP is executed at the time of sales order and delivery processing in
all three solutions (SAP ERP, SAP ERP with GATP, and SAP S/4HANA), as
depicted in Figure 1.3.
SAP ERP
Sales order 1-+<
Order
confirmation._ Delivery
Goods issue
SAP ERP
Sales order
Order confirmation
Delivery
Goods issue
'
Sales order -
- ATP
GATP Delivery -
-
ATP
SAPS/4HANA
Sales order i--+<
Order
confi rmation~ Delivery ~<
Goods issue
Figure 1.3 Execution of Classic ATP for Sales Order and Delivery P rocessing
In addition to product availability check, all three ATP solutions also pro-
vide features, including the following:
• Product allocation
This is a mechanism to avoid "first come, first served" problems in order
management.
• Backorder processing
This is a re-ATP process (i.e., carrying out ATP after initial order creation)
to confirm high-priority orders and unconfirm low-priority orders.
Both product allocation and backorder processing are available in SAP ERP,
SAP APO GATP, and aATP. GATP provides very advanced features for prod-
uct allocation and backorder processing when used with SAP ERP. aATP has
10
1 Available-to-Promise Basics
an entirely new design for product allocation and backorder processing
with its SAP Fiori apps and is easier (and more flexible) to set up than the
complex GATP. Product allocation and backorder processing with aATP will
be discussed in detail in Section 3 and Section 5, respectively.
Figure 1.4 shows the process flow for a sales order entry, along with its logis-
tic execution; this typical process flow is applicable for all three ATP solu-
tions with advanced features like product allocation and backorder pro-
cessing.